3 to 75% of women do not get the
treatment for pmenopause and menopause
that they deserve. And women are asking,
why is it that I can't manage stress the
way I once did? Why do I have this belly
fat that appeared out of nowhere and my
usual techniques for how to deal with
that aren't working? Why would I rather
mop the floor than have sex with my
husband? But there's more than 100 plus
symptoms that women aren't aware of. But
you believe many of the symptoms of
menopause are avoidable. Yes. And let's
get into that. Dr. Sarasal is the
Harvard trained physician and hormone
expert who's unlocking the science and
simple tricks behind feeling your best
no matter your age. Most people have
imbalanced hormones. Think of them as
text messages that your body sends to
keep everything functioning optimally.
But for example, out of the 40,000
people I've tested and treated, around
90% of them have a problem with their
cortisol hormones. And if my body's
making too much cortisol, what is the
harm? It's associated with more belly
fat. We know that it shrinks the brain
in women but not men. It's associated
with depression, but also if you're
someone who's making a lot of cortisol,
you're going to make less testosterone,
and that leads to a whole host of
serious problems. And what about trauma?
Does that impact your hormones? Oh, yes.
And one of the ways to measure trauma is
the ACE test. It's a validated
questionnaire, and they found that
people who had one or higher ACE scores
had a greater risk of 45 different
chronic diseases. And my score is 6 out
of 10. But those ACEs are living on in
your body. And you went on a journey to
heal yourself. Yes. With lifestyle
medicine, not a pharmaceutical. Tell me
about that journey.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to this show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor
before we start? If you like the show
and you like what we do here and you
want to support us, the free simple way
that you can do just that is by hitting
the subscribe button. And my commitment
to you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power, me and my team,
to make sure that this show is better
for you every single week. We'll listen
to your feedback. We'll find the guests
that you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do. Thank you so
much. Dr. Sarah Zal, what is it that you
do for people? I'm a
physician, so I work in academic
medicine. I do research for people. I
teach and I take care of patients. So
that's the official BBC answer. And the
unofficial answer is I'm a healer. And
what does that mean, a healer? Because
that's a broad term. So that could mean
many things.
It means that my
task is to connect to your innate
healing
capacity and to work with you to
activate it. And who do you do that for?
So I do it for professional athletes,
executives
and everyday people. And when you say
healing, if someone came to you and they
said, "How do you heal people?" What
would your answer be? My answer is I
don't heal people. That's
uh to me that's a patriarchal way of
thinking about it.
What I do is I work with someone who's
got the capacity to heal and we work to
be in the service of that. So it's not
me providing something that they don't
have already. It's more understanding
what some of the obstacles might be to
their own healing. Understanding what
would allow them to be the best version
of themselves to feel fully alive. And
what was your training? So can you talk
me through your sort of academic
journey?
Sure. So my training is as a
bioengineer. I did the Harvard MIT
program which is designed to train
physician scientists.
So the um ethos of this particular
program was to train the future
researchers and um academic
physicians so that we could move the
field forward. And all along I was
really interested in how do you bring
the best of conventional medicine
together with more ancient ways of
thinking about the body? things like aya
from India or uh traditional Chinese
medicine. How do we take these wisdom
traditions and use that to inform
mainstream medicine? So that's the type
of care that I learned how to do. I
became a
surgeon. I did primary care after I
finished a residency in obstetrics and
gynecology. But I also realized pretty
early on that I wanted to take care of
men, too. So I've done that for about
the past 15 years and I would say that
that training in bioengineering and a
comfort with big data and with um
optimizing data sets to improve whatever
the goal is like performance or having
the most the best conversations you can
have on a
podcast. That's what gets me excited.
How many people do you think you've
treated or seen or worked with directly
in your career? Probably about 40,000.
And and if you had to try and summarize
maybe the top three or five things that
you're doing for
them, what would you say? Well, number
one would be
hormones. Hormones are the portal that
most people start with me. Um, it's a
way of thinking
about what drives what you're interested
in. Most people have imbalanced
hormones. I haven't detected that you do
yet, but most people have an issue, say,
with cortisol, either making too much of
it or too little or even both within the
same day. And it affects energy. It
affects mitochondria.
So I would say the number one thing I
help people with is their hormones.
Getting their hormones back into
balance. Starting first with lifestyle
medicine, not a pharmaceutical. So that
includes breath work, which I think is
one of the most
underutilized tools that we have in
health. Number two would
be nutrition, but taken to the next
level. not what you might think of that
a nutritionist would advise you, but
what specifically is the ideal food plan
for you for your goals. So whether
you're a entrepreneur and podcaster, an
investor, or you're a professional
basketball player, or you're a woman in
pmenopause at age 42, what's the optimal
nutrition for you? And we can measure
that and we can look at the interaction
of your
genetics together with what you're
eating to see how we could personalize
that. Number three I would say
is
prevention. And prevention has been a
hard thing to sell. It's um you know a
lot of people just don't want to invest
in prevention and yet I take care of
people who are in this continuum from a
state of health often to a state of pre-
disease like pre-diabetes as an example
and if they don't do something about it
they then move on to diabetes. So I like
to intervene there as early as possible
to reverse
disease and most of that is
lifestyle. So those are the things that
I tend to work with. I do a lot of
metabolic health because it's so
critical for the energy that you feel
each day. You have a very diverse
experience as a doctor/healer.
feels like you've really had a lot of
sort of reference points in your career
that you've drawn upon and ultimately
you became the director of precision
medicine at the Marcus Institute in
Philadelphia. That's correct. Precision
medicine, that term. How does that
differ from conventional medicine?
It's quite different. So, conventional
mainstream modern
medicine I believe is broken. I feel
like there are so many people who are
failed by our current medical system,
especially people with chronic disease,
things like diabetes, autoimmune
disease. So
with mainstream medicine, generally what
happens is that you develop a condition,
say a high cholesterol, and you get
treated with a pharmaceutical, say a
statin. And what we know is that we have
to treat about 100 to 200 people for one
person to benefit. So that I would
define as imprecision medicine. Whereas
precision medicine is where we
understand you as an individual. We look
at your genomic blueprint. We look at
your biomarkers. We look at your
wearables data to
determine NF1 experiments where you
serve as your own control and figure out
what's going to be the most effective
for you depending on what your goals
are. NF1 you mean where that individual
is the study, they are the experiment.
That's correct. You're not looking at
broad sample sizes. What is wrong with
conventional medicine? You use the term
that it's broken. What is wrong about
that approach?
There's a few things that are wrong. One
is
that it has become medicine for the
average. And when you look at scientific
evidence and you rank order it, what's
considered the highest form of evidence
is the randomized trial. But the
randomized trial is mostly around using
a pharmaceutical. So, in the example I
just gave, using a statin to help
someone with their cholesterol, maybe
help prevent a heart attack, the number
one
killer. The problem is we then based on
randomized trials come up with medicine
for the
average. And it's not
about optimal health. It's not even
centered around health. It's centered
around, okay, heart disease, number one
killer. How do we help people prevent
it? Oh, lifestyle medicine prevents 70%
of it. Well, we're not going to do that
because we can't make money off of it.
There's no profit motive. So, we're
going to focus instead on these
pharmaceuticals. Oh, GLP1s. That sounds
like a good idea. Let's try that and
solve problems with GLP1s.
So to me, there's many layers to why the
health care system is broken, but one
key area is that 70% of the diseases
we're facing right now are utterly
preventable with lifestyle medicine.
70%.
You used the word hormone balance
earlier on. Um, and you said that that's
the portal in which people often find
you. I really don't know much about
hormones and it's not necessarily
something that the average person thinks
that they can do much about I think
because it's not easy to measure our
hormones is it? Well, you can measure it
in the blood. So, it's it's not that
hard to measure hormones but I think
there's there's a way that in mainstream
medicine we're taught to tell people
that their hormones vary too much and so
it's not worth measuring. Yeah, that's
what I've heard before. It's what you've
heard. But then if you're a woman who's
34 and you're trying to get pregnant and
you're having trouble in that situation,
we'll measure every single hormone.
We'll look at thyroid, cortisol,
testosterone, estrogen, progesterone,
the control hormones like follical
stimulating hormone. And
yet somehow in that situation, testing
is more reliable, but it's not in this
other situation. That doesn't make
sense. That's double standard. Why did
you choose this career? What What is it
about you, your childhood, your life
that sent you down this road? I would
say it was growing up with a fair amount
of trauma.
And you know the what I've learned about
trauma is it's less about what actually
happened to you. It's the way that it
became embedded in the system of your
body. So for me, my parents got divorced
when I was really young. I grew up in a
way that I became a helper. And I
realized that by being
um someone who was really looking out
for others and tuning into their energy
and helping them achieve their goals
that kept me really safe. And so there's
a way that
that it was very resonant for me to
discover medicine.
And one of the things we know about
people who go into medicine is
that people tend to have a fair amount
of trauma that leads to becoming a
helper in this way. What was that
trauma?
So there's a lot of different ways to
measure trauma. One of the ways that I
find helpful is something called the
adverse childhood
experiences. So ACE for short. I think
I've got it here. Oh, do you? It's a
questionnaire. So my score is six out of
10. So childhood divorce, my parents got
divorced when I was about a year old.
That's one out of the six. Other things
are abuse, neglect,
um emotional abuse, physical abuse,
having a parent with a substance use
disorder. So things that you know it's
not a complete list but it's a validated
questionnaire that was used in the
1990s and found among people who are
middle-aged you're not quite yet
middle-aged but for people who are
middle-aged 40 to 65 they found that
people who had higher A scores one or
higher they then had a greater risk of
45 different chronic diseases.
How important is it for us to understand
our early upbringing and our trauma if
we are to heal as adults? Because you
said there that if you score high on
this ACE score, this trauma score, this
childhood trauma system sort of
questionnaire, then as an adult, you're
more likely to get a variety of
different diseases. So, do we need to
heal our bodies in some way to avoid
getting some of those diseases? Yes. And
that's the critical question.
So if you know that you have an elevated
A score and there's a lot of people who
have a score of zero about 40% of men
about 30% of
women and what we know is that if you've
got this greater risk for 45 different
chronic conditions there's a way that
those ACEs are living on in your
body unless you're addressing them. And
it's the living on in your body that we
want to pay attention to. So for some
people it's their immune system and it
leads to more allergies, more histamine
overload, more um food intolerances,
maybe
autoimmunity where their immune system
is attacking their own tissues, maybe
autoimmune disease. There are other
people who have more nervous system
dysregulation. Maybe they've got anxiety
or depression or post-traumatic stress
disorder, mental health issues. And for
other people, it could be more
endocrine. They've got chronic cortisol
problems, which is hormones. Yes.
How did that manifest in your physical
health? So, I didn't start to detect
this until my 30s. But what I found was
that I
had
depression. I had premenstrual
syndrome. I had my first baby when I was
32 and I couldn't lose the baby weight.
And as all of this was happening, and
I'm a physician, I went to my doctor for
help. And he suggested that I go on
Prozac for the depression and the mood
issues, which is an anti-depressant
pill, a selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor, that I go on the birth
control pill because I sounded hormonal,
and that I start exercising more and
eating less. So that was his treatment
and that's typical mainstream medicine
treatment. But I wasn't satisfied with
that. I felt like that doesn't seem
right. And I left his office and went to
the lab, ordered my own hormone panel
and found that my cortisol was three
times what it should have been. So
there's the optimal range for cortisol
in the blood. It's about 10 to 15 in the
morning, 6:00 to 10 in the afternoon.
And mine was 30.
I also looked at my fasting glucose and
insulin and I had pre-diabetes in my
30s. I had no idea. No one was checking
for this. So, I'm answering your
question about how these ACEs showed up
in my body. We know that adverse
childhood experiences linked to blood
sugar problems and a greater risk of
pre-diabetes and diabetes, which I had.
We know that they linked to chronic
stress and cortisol problems, high
perceived stress, whether the stress is
there or
not. It also led to as I started using
wearables, low heart rate variability,
the time between each of my heartbeats.
And that's a measure of the sympathetic
nervous system, fight, flight, freeze,
fawn, versus the parasympathetic nervous
system, which is where healing occurs.
And you went on a journey to heal
yourself. Yes. Tell me about that
journey.
So in my
30s, this is a huge epiphany for me
because I realized that I wasn't
trained. I wasn't
educated, even though I had an
outstanding education, I wasn't trained
to help with
this. No one taught me about cortisol
problems and how to manage that. I mean,
I was taught about the extremes of
Cushing disease- which is really high
cortisol levels and Addison's disease,
which JFK had, and it's when your
adrenals in your back above your kidneys
don't make cortisol. So, I was taught
about the extremes, but I wasn't taught
about all the people who kind of live in
the middle with problems with their
cortisol. So this is when I started to
take the scientific literature and apply
it to my
situation because I wanted to feel
better. I felt old before my time and I
had a lot of belly fat and I was on this
path of aging at an accelerated clip. So
I did it to help myself but then I also
wanted to help my patients and it felt
like I needed to go deeper and
understand what can we do to treat the
trauma and also to treat the more uh
proximal measurements that we're making
like with cortisol with heart rate
variability with blood sugar.
So what was step one for you?
Step one was awareness. Okay. And I had
no idea. These are not things that most
doctors are checking for. It's pretty
crazy that you're a doctor, but you
don't know this part of
health. I mean, how are you going to
help anybody if you don't fully
understand health from a more sort of
holistic perspective? That's a critical
point. So, I was taught at Harvard that
if you have blood sugar problems, if
you've got pre-diabetes and
diabetes, the treatment is lifestyle.
It's the most effective to change the
food that you're eating, to increase
your exercise, to um manage your stress
in a different way. And yet, I wasn't
taught how to help my patients do any of
those things. I was taught how to
prescribe a medication for it like
metformin or some other treatment but I
wasn't taught how to do lifestyle
medicine. I had 30 minutes on
nutrition. So yes, it is pretty crazy.
They gave you 30 minutes on nutrition.
Yes. During which training? This is
medical school and I got about the same
amount on pmenopause and menopause.
Really? I mean that explains a lot. Yes,
it does about the medical system. So
step one was awareness. What was step
two? Step two
was what does the science tell
us? And if we take what the science
tells us, usually applied to a
population, that then sets us up for
step three, which is end of one
experiments, trying things on yourself
and then measuring. That's right. When
we think of cortisol, which was the
first sort of marker that you saw was
elevated, we think of stress. So, we
think we get cortisol if we're stressed.
So, my brain, my my very naive brain
said, "Well, you just need to be less
stressed,
Sarah. So, you should just go on holiday
and then your cortisol will come down."
I used to think that, too. And then I
would come back from the holiday and I
would still have cortisol problems.
So stress is part of it, but cortisol is
really interesting. These hormones that
we're talking about, estrogen,
progesterone,
testosterone, cortisol, insulin, it's
not a democracy. Like they don't have
equal footing. Cortisol is more like a
dictator, especially if it's out of
whack. So you need cortisol to live.
Whereas you could live without
testosterone, estrogen, progesterone.
can't live without insulin. But cortisol
is critical in terms of helping you with
your immune system, helping you with
your blood sugar, and just managing the
stress response. So, it's not quite as
simple as thinking your way out of a
high cortisol or a low cortisol. And
there are ways that your body can become
stuck in a particular pattern of making
too much cortisol or making not enough
cortisol.
And if my body's making too much
cortisol and my levels are too high,
what is the what is the harm? The harm
is it's associated with
depression. It's about 50% of people
with high cortisol. 50% of people with
depression have high cortisol. It's used
by some
psychiatrists as a suicide
marker. It's associated with more belly
fat. And so the fat receptors, the fat
cells in your belly have increased
receptors for cortisol. So it's a way of
growing your belly fat. We know that it
shrinks the brain in women, but not men.
starting in midlife, starting in your
40s. It's not an old age thing. And this
has been shown a couple of different
ways. There was a study from the
University of Texas in San Antonio
showing that women in their 40s with
high cortisol have a shrinkage of total
brain volume. And then Lisa Moscone at
Cornell also just showed in a study
looking at men and women that women with
high cortisol also have shrinkage of
their total brain volume. and they start
to have a difficult time using glucose
as fuel in their brain,
which is going to result in what kind of
behaviors? Well, it makes you tired. It
gives you slow brain
energy. And I can tell for the most part
you don't have that. But if you do have
it, there's a way that you kind of your
brain slows down. You feel foggy. You're
not able to multitask and kind of keep
up keep up with everything. Is there a
link between cortisol and uh trauma? Oh
yes.
What is that link? So for people who
experience toxic stress or trauma, what
typically happens is cortisol goes up.
That's part of the alarm. Yeah. The
body's stress response. What we know is
that for people who've got more serious
exposure to trauma and they have
post-traumatic stress
disorder, those people have probably
gone through a period of high cortisol
and now they can't keep up anymore and
they are in a low cortisol state.
What are the things in in the world at
the moment that are messing up our
hormones? because the subject matter of
hormones has become increasingly popular
and I know that there's hormones like
cortisol which we've talked about um
testosterone, estrogen, progesterone, um
insulin, glucose. What are the what are
the big things that are like messing up
our hormones at the moment if if I
because I want to make sure my hormones
are in check. Um so I'm a guy. I'm sure
that there's you know some of these
hormones are more like things like
estrogen have I think more pertinent to
women but No, it's important for men
too. Oh really? So estrogen and
progesterone are incredibly important
for men and it's, you know, it's
involved in uh bone
strength. Progesterone is involved in
sleep in men. So the levels are lower in
men and your testosterone is about 10
times higher. But in women and men,
they're all
important. So what's messing with our
hormones? I would
say toxin
exposure. So there's endocrine
disruptors. There's more than 700 known
endocrine disruptors. Things like
bisphenol A um like the plastic lining
that you see in cans or in uh plastic
containers, water containers. There's um
skin care products which women are
exposed to more things like moisturizer
and makeup and other things that contain
um endocrine disruptors like parabens
and
um there's flame retardants that we get
exposed to. So there's a whole class of
endocrine
disruptors and
then it feels right now like we are more
disregulated than I've ever
seen. And I'm not
sure what the cause is. I don't know if
it's the
post-pandemic experience or part of what
we're experiencing in the United States
with the change in leadership.
It just feels like there's this hum of
dysregulation that I haven't seen over
my career.
Are you noticing that? Are you seeing
that in your patients? And I see it in
my patients. I see it in their wearable
data. I see it in heart rate
variability. I see it in the cortisol
levels that I'm measuring.
You asked if I'm noticing that. I mean,
the more digital the world has become, I
think I've seen more dysregulation, and
we're obviously moving further in that
direction at rapid speed, especially
with things like AI now and
um algorithms getting more smart and
addictive. Yes. So, I I see that. Also,
there's just been a change
in I think the algorithms, the social
media algorithms will compete with
themselves to to see who can hold you
the most. And to do that, they have to
kind of grab your attention. and the
easiest ways to grab your attention is
by showing you things that are probably
disregulating. Yes, it's an attention
economy and the cost in that fight for
attention is that often the nervous
system becomes more disregulated.
So, if you had to come into my life and
you had to optimize my life to make sure
that all my hormones were in check, you
would get rid of plastics and and toxins
from my everyday life, my bathroom, um,
etc. I'd look at your skin care. I'd
look at your cleaning products. I'd look
at your air
quality. I'd probably install a couple
of air filters if you don't have that.
I'd want to know about your stress
because you're someone who performs at
such a high level and I would assume
that you found the right level of stress
where it's not so little that you're not
productive but it's not to excess to the
point that there's a cost to it
physiologically.
Yeah. And then and I'd want to look at
your food. I'd want to know how much
protein you're consuming. Are you
getting the right amount of
carbohydrates? Seems like you are. Are
you utilizing those well? What's going
on with the continuous glucose monitor?
How are your nutrients? What's your
vitamin D? Things like that. You're a
big fan of continuous glucose monitors,
aren't you? I am. I think it gives
real-time feedback, immediate feedback
on the food that you're eating. I've
seen nothing else change behavior like a
continuous glucose monitor. And for
anybody that doesn't know, it's the
little patch you put on your arm and it
tells you your blood sugar levels in
real time straight to your
phone.
Sugar, is sugar the
enemy? I don't think sugar is the enemy.
I think the enemy
is the way that we eat it to access, the
way that we use it to change our
emotional state.
And we know people who have adverse
childhood experiences, they're more
likely to have disordered eating.
They're more likely to have problems
modulating the amount of sugar they
consume. When you're treating patients,
do you focus heavily on their blood
sugar levels? I do because I think it's
an important indicator of the way the
biochemistry of the body, the metabolism
is working. It tells me about their
mitochondria. It tells me about the way
that they're producing
energy ATP by ATP. This compound, this
um this measure of energy that you
produce inside of all of your cells,
which is called ATP. ATP.
And that ATP then drives what? It drives
our everything we do. ATP is fuel. So,
it allows you to feel like you're fully
energized, especially when you wake up
in the morning. And are there any
supplements that I should be taking if
I'm trying to optimize my hormonal
balance? Well, I'd have to look at your
total picture, but most of us
inherit somewhere around 5 to
seven genomic
um vulnerabilities and often we want to
work around those. So for instance, for
me, my vitamin D receptor sucks. It just
doesn't work very well. So I have to
take increased levels of vitamin D to
keep the um kind of the baseline amount
of vitamin D in my system normal. So we
would want to look for those. We'd look
at your genomics to
see what's your relationship to B
vitamins. With the stress that you
manage, do you have a a deficit with B
vitamins? For a lot of men, it doesn't
show up until around age 40. So, this is
a good time for you to do a baseline.
When you look at people's biomarkers and
their blood samples, what are the things
that you like typically always see that
are deficient? Because I'm sure there's
things from a social level that we're
just all kind of getting wrong.
Vitamin D is common. So, somewhere
around 70 to 80% of people don't have
enough vitamin D. And one of the things
that I think is so important to realize
about vitamin D is that it's got 400
jobs in the body. One of them is keeping
your boundary in your gut intact. So
keeping tight junctions working so that
you don't have leaky gut. So vitamin D
is a common one. I had an executive that
I took care of on Tuesday and he had a
fasting glucose of
102, which is in the pre-diabetes range.
No doctor has pointed this out to him
before. He had uh his cholesterol was
starting to climb. His blood pressure
was borderline, not high enough to
require a medication,
but at the point where we want to turn
that ship around before he needs a
medication. He had a level of
inflammation in his
body that was causing aches and pains
and
um kind of like this silent condition
that um wasn't working well for him. So
there's a couple ways to measure that.
For him, his homocyine was elevated. It
was
14.7. And that's a that's one that's
really easy to measure in a basic panel.
What we want with homoyine, which is um
heart specific inflammation, we want
that to be 5 to 7. And when it's
elevated, that tells us that often part
of the biochemistry in the body, your
methylation is not working well.
Methylation is just where you add a
carbon and three hydrogens to a
molecule. And it's a way that we turn
uh genes on and off. And so in this
person's case, he wasn't getting enough
B vitamins, methylated B vitamins. So we
started him on a supplement to help him
with that. So that's a common one. His
testosterone was good, so didn't have to
address that. This guy was about 52.
Um, his cortisol was good. He was the
chief financial officer of a company
back east. Well, he had a number of
things on his genomics that we needed to
pay attention to. What was interesting
about this guy, Steve, is that he was an
athlete. He played football in high
school and college. He had this identity
as an athlete, but when he came to see
me at age 52, he was barely exercising.
He would lift weights maybe once a week.
He would go swimming for about 30
minutes once a week. And so he wasn't
leveraging disposal of glucose the way
that he could be, the way that he used
to when he was in his 20s. So a big part
of understanding what made him tick was
to reaffirm this identity as an athlete
and to use that to address this
metabolic crisis that was starting to
happen in his body before it was too
late
cuz he's got too much glucose and he's
not doing enough with it. That's right.
So his body is having to store it and
getting inflamed.
and he said, "You know, listen, it's
been the Christmas holidays. I had a lot
of pound cake. I had some cocktails. You
know, maybe that's part of the problem."
But we had measured his hemoglobin A1C,
which is a threemon summary of what's
happening with your glucoses. And the
problem predated Christmas. So, we
needed to get them into action around
exercise. Getting back to hormones, I
really want to um close off on this
subject of cortisol because I know that
that's such a important hormone. I've
heard you say before that you believe
that uh cortisol is the most critical
hormone to get into balance. You want to
focus on cortisol really first and
foremost. So, someone like me, is there
anything else I need to know to get my
hor my cortisol levels in balance? And
also, what percentage of the population
do you think have their cortisol out of
whack?
H so we don't have data on the numerator
or the
denominator and my patient population is
enriched with people who've got cortisol
problems. So out of all of the people I
test, somewhere around 90% of them have
a problem with their cortisol. And that
includes professional
athletes because at least in the US like
basketball
players, they travel a ton. They play
backto-back games. They've got a
cortisol load, a stress load that is
pretty high even for someone in their
20s or 30s who's used to high
performance. So the number is high. If I
had to look at the general
population, it would be a total
speculation. I would say somewhere
around 30 to
50%. And what do you do about that? If
you're an athlete and you've got
elevated cortisol levels,
I think there's a number of different
things. There's the top down approach,
which is cognitive kind of like what is
my prefrontal cortex? How can I leverage
that to work with this? And then there's
more of a bottomup approach which is
using your senses to create safety and
to change the cortisol signal kind of
the alarm in the way that it goes off in
the body. So breath work is really
important for that. Meditation
um different forms of
movement dancing you know rhythmic
movements walking hiking.
Running's a little tricky because um
that can be a stress response and it can
raise
cortisol. Um so I would say for a
professional
athlete, what I usually recommend is um
meditation, regular meditation, and
finding what's a really good fit for
them. Because, you know, for some
people,
mindfulness-based stress reduction is a
good fit, but that doesn't fit for
everyone. Other people like resonance
breathing, like a 5-second inhale,
7-second
exhale, six breaths per minute. Doing
that for 10 to 20 minutes. That can
really help to create balance between
the parasympathetic nervous system and
the sympathetic nervous
system. For some of my athletes, it's a
supplement. So if they've got high
cortisol, one of the things I often do
is to give them cortisol manager, which
is a supplement that includes
ashwagandha and phosphatidal serereine.
And it's been shown to lower cortisol
levels. So if they're traveling and they
have to take a plane back to
Philadelphia after an away game,
cortisol manager can help them manage
the cortisol. I found a supplement
called I can't pronounce the name
properly, but riol. Oh, rodeiola.
Rodeiola. Yes. Rodeiola is an
adaptogen. So, it's a it's an herbal
therapy that's been shown to help with
cortisol. Lowers cortisol. Yes. And I
was reading that it increases your focus
potentially. Yes, it does. Do you
prescribe that to athletes? I do. So,
generally what I try to do with most of
my athletes is have them take a
supplement either first thing in the
morning or before they go to bed. It's
harder to do it during the day. And so I
tend to start with cortisol manager
because I think it's got the best data,
but rdea is also a good choice and I
have prescribed that. Is it easy for
people to change in this regard to get
them to make a set of different
decisions? I think we're at a time of
year where a lot of people are thinking
about changes and a lot of people are
failing repetitively every year at the
changes they say they want to make. Is
it easy to get someone to change? I
would say behavior change is the hardest
thing that we do as humans. I think
there are ways that
uh adverse childhood experiences tend to
set a pattern that's very hard to break.
But I see people change their behavior
all the time. And I think part of it
depends
on what's the pain of staying the same.
if it's high enough to motivate you and
to help you, you know, not take the shot
or two of tequila that has been your
downfall in the past. If um you have
something that keeps you accountable and
has like the Hawthorne effect, like a
continuous glucose monitor, I think that
can also be very helpful as if someone
was watching you because my patients
with their continuous glucose data, I am
watching them. I'm scanning them.
But does doesn't that mean that in order
to change, some people just need a bit
more pain?
I would say people have a different
level of pain that motivates change.
Have you ever seen a situation? We were
talking about this a couple of couple of
weeks ago where when you're trying to
help someone, you actually end up
propping them up and because you're
intervening to stop them experiencing
the pain that they might otherwise, you
end up harming them because you're
preventing them from going to that place
where, you know, they call rock bottom
where self-motivated change would occur.
It's a good question. I think there's
there's a fine line
between motivating and also speaking
your truth about what you're willing to
tolerate, say in your partner or a
friend or family
member, and also enabling or
[Music]
um being
codependent. And so you have to try to
find that line. I mean, one of the
things I found over my career, and it
took me a while to learn this, is that
if someone has denial about what they're
doing and how it's affecting their
relationships, their health, their
ability to work, say, drinking too much,
having a sticky relationship with
alcohol, it's not my job to break
through their denial. They have to do
that. That's their work. Now, I can
say alcohol has no health benefits.
Here's what it does. Here's what it does
to the female brain. Here's what it does
to the male brain. Here's what it does
to um break the boundary in your gut and
cause leaky gut. Here's all of the
unoured effects of it. But it's not my
job to break through their denial. They
have to do that.
And that's very hard especially if you
have a family member or a a friend or a
partner who is doing things that are
harming themselves. So what do you
consider your job to be if you are a
friend or a family member?
Your job is to determine what your
boundaries are, what you're willing to
tolerate to stay in relationship.
And that's, you know, that's where
interventions play a role, where you
confront the person and
say, "I'm really worried about you.
Here's what I'm witnessing. I really
feel like you need to approach this in a
different way. Are you willing?" But
it's a consenting process. You don't do
it for them.
What's your experience?
Well, I just I just have so many, you
know, because these days I can help
people a much more than I could 10 years
ago, whether it's financially or in
other ways. And so, it's often tempting
when someone in my life is struggling in
some way to just intervene with some
kind of crutch. Yes. And I've actually
seen over the last like 15 years that
the best things that I've ever done for
some of my friends wasn't an
intervention. It wasn't paying for
something for them or taking care of
something for them. It was being honest
with them and
then being there as they figured it out
themselves. And often it was actually
removing my crutch which meant that they
would fall a little bit and then climb
themselves out of the ditch to a very
good life. So, I just always think about
that that a lot of us through love or
through the fact that we can often end
up propping people up in our lives and
we're actually doing them a disservice
because we're kind of inhibiting their
own natural growth journey. I agree with
that. And I would I would also say that
what you just described is holding a
mirror to someone in a way that is very
loving but also clear. It's a clean
mirror and it's very different than just
loaning them the money. Yeah. And then
being there for them as they stumble and
struggle and try to make things
different. You you talked earlier on
about the executive that you checked um
recently. You said his testosterone
levels were intact. Yes.
At what age should I be thinking about
my testosterone levels or should I be
thinking about them all the time? cuz I
kind of see it as something that I need
to worry about when I'm when I get a
little bit older into my 40s and 50s.
It tends not to decline until about age
40, but I would say do a baseline now.
Okay, so a baseline biomarker assessment
would be
worthwhile. And you know, one of the
things we found during the pandemic was
that um the National Basketball
Association was playing in a bubble.
They were playing in Florida and the
players cut off from their families and
kind of stuck in Florida for a period of
time. They had low testosterone levels
and these guys normally have pretty high
testosterone levels.
So, there can be specific situations
that can affect your testosterone level.
What was it that was affecting those?
Part of it was just
being in a hotel, in a bubble, unable to
leave, cut off from their community,
their family, their friends, their usual
ways of blowing off steam. I imagine
they're they didn't measure their
cortisol, but I imagine it was probably
higher than normal. And women have
testosterone, too, but you said, I think
earlier, that men just have 10 times
more testosterone. Men have more, but
it's the most abundant hormone in the
female body. Women are exquisitly
sensitive to it. It's the most abundant
hormone. Yes. Higher concentration than
estrogen or progesterone. About 15 to 70
nanogs in a woman. That's what I read on
WebMD. Yes, that's that's a pretty good
level. And in men, 300 a,000 nanogs.
Yes. I like to see it somewhere around
500 to a,000. And what would be
a sign that I had low testosterone if
I'm a man?
Belly fat.
Gynecomastia. What's that? That's when
you have breast development. Okay. mood
changes, mood swings, uh irritability,
uh
depression, cardiovascular changes,
erectile dysfunction, decreased libido.
What about in a woman? So, if a woman
has low testosterone, what are the
symptoms we see in a woman? They're
similar. So, um both sexes have fatigue.
That's very common. Decreased libido.
They might be working out at the gym and
not seeing a response. They might have
some hair
loss. And testosterone in women has a
few unique features. Like one of the
things we've seen looking at MBA
students, students who are getting a
masters in business administration is
that the women with higher testosterone
tend to be more comfortable with
financial
risk. I believe it also tracks with
confidence and agency. We have less hard
data on that. But those are some of the
things that I see. It's a hormone of
vitality in both men and women. So if a
woman is low testosterone, she might be
less confident, have less motivation,
less agency, less willing to take risks,
less sex drive. What if she has high tes
testosterone levels? Too high. So high
testosterone tends to track with
polycystic ovary syndrome. It's the most
common hormone imbalance that women
have. It leads to
infertility. Um it leads to increased
hair growth in places that you don't
want it. So that can include like your
chin and between your
breasts. It can lead to
um insulin resistance in some but not
all but somewhere around 70% of people
with PCOS have insulin
resistance. So it leads to symptoms of
excess androgen, acne, heretism.
It also is associated with problems with
the
mitochondria. It's also linked to
disregulated stress
response. That's something we see with
people with PCOS. So, if I'm a man or a
woman and I want to get my testosterone
levels in order and I don't want to
inject myself with testosterone, are
there natural ways, easy ways for me to
get my testosterone balanced?
It depends on how off it is. First place
to start is your cortisol because
cortisol has this
um interdependent relationship with
other hormones. So if you're someone
who's making a lot of cortisol, you're
going to make less testosterone. So
someone who's got a high level of
stress, like I was talking about the NBA
players in the bubble, maybe their
stress was high and their cortisol was
high and that was why their testosterone
was lower.
So then if I'm a woman with polycystic
ovary syndrome and my testosterone is
high, doesn't that mean I want to
increase my
cortisol? No. In that
situation, what we know is that food is
probably the most important factor with
someone with PCOS. And inside of 7 days,
by eating a lower carbohydrate diet, you
can change your testosterone level. So
you can lower it significantly within
seven days. within seven days. So,
exercise. I'm currently eating like a
ketogenic diet, so my carbohydrate level
is extremely low. Does that mean my
testosterone levels are going to be low?
Not necessarily, because you're not
someone with PCOS. So, it's not quite
translatable across sex and gender. But
for you, with a ketogenic diet, what we
typically see is that insulin levels are
lower. So, it does seem to help with
metabolic health.
It can cause some thyroid dysfunction.
So, it's worth tracking thyroid. We know
that people on a ketogenic diet
sometimes have increased inflammation.
There are some people who are super
responders and they just do super well
with ketogenic diet, but some people
have about a 10% change in their LDL,
their so-called um bad lipoprotein. So,
if you stay on it for more than four
weeks, I generally recommend that you
look at some biomarkers.
Let's talk about estrogen then because I
I was under the impression that um only
women had estrogen, but you're telling
me that it's an important hormone for
men as well. It is. Why is it so
important for for both sexes? What does
it do? Well, I would say it's more
important for women because it regulates
the entire female body.
So we have estrogen receptors throughout
our body. Um when women there's two
different life stages where estrogen is
low. The first is
postpartum. So if you give birth to a
baby, you go from skyhigh estrogen
levels down to almost nothing when you
deliver your baby and you deliver your
placenta. And so for a lot of women when
they're
postpartum, maybe they've got mood
issues,
um they've got fatigue that is more than
just the sleep
deprivation. This can be a preview of
coming attractions in pmenopause and
menopause. So it's a window of
opportunity that can tell you about the
way estrogen works in your body. So for
the female body, estrogen has hundreds
of jobs. It keeps her joints lubricated.
We know that frozen shoulder is a really
common uh diagnosis in women who are in
pmenopause and menopause because the
estrogen receptors just aren't getting
the estrogen. They're not having
molecular sex between the estrogen and
the estrogen
receptor. So estrogen is really critical
in women. It regulates mood
um breast development, development of
hips. It's a lubricant for your joints.
Um, it's also really critical for your
skin. When estrogen goes down, you make
less collagen and that's why women
notice that their skin ages. And in men,
it's a little bit different. The dynamic
range is more narrow. And what we
generally want with men is for you to
have enough
estrogen to serve some of these bodily
functions like with keeping your bones
strong um but not too much.
Does it have a role in weight
distribution in my body? So where are
the fat stores and stuff? So in men I
don't know. I don't know the answer to
that. I'll have to look it up and get
back to you. But in women, yes,
absolutely. So, one of the things that
happens for women over the age of 40 is
that they typically become insulin
resistant. Their cells become numb to
insulin. And what we know is that they
gain about five pounds of fat and they
lose about 5 pounds of muscle every
decade after age 40. So there's this
redistribution of fat to your point
where they they deposit less at their
breasts in their hips and their buttocks
and more at their
abdomen. Does that happen in
men? I think there's some version of it
in men, but I just would have to confirm
that.
And is that inevitable?
No, no, no. You have a choice.
So for women, I think what's important
is
to
understand what what are your estrogen
levels that are associated with your
best function. And that's why I think
baseline testing can be so helpful to
know where your thyroid is right now,
your cortisol, your testosterone,
um to know where you are with your
metabolic health, so that when you're in
your 40s, you can look back and say,
"Okay, I was in a state of optimization.
I want to go back to something similar
to
that. So for women, what I would say
is right now 73 to 75% of women do not
get the treatment for pmenopause and
menopause that they deserve. They're not
being offered for instance hormone
therapy and that has to change. But
hormone therapy can help to reverse this
so that you are more likely to
um not have some of these body
composition changes as you get
older. And it's not just hormone
therapy. I would say it's beyond hormone
therapy. It's estrogen, progesterone,
testosterone, but it's also heavy
weightlifting. It's cardiovascular
fitness. It's disposing of the glucose
properly. eating the right foods,
disposing of the glucose properly. Yes.
What do you mean by that? So, if you're,
you know, like when I was in my 30s, my
fasting glucose was very high. It was in
the pre-diabetes range. And so, I needed
to change the way that I
was burning through glucose, like using
it with exercise.
So disposing, it's like an input output
equation where you're inputting with
your food and you're outputting with
your exercise and you want to get a good
match between the two and muscle
resistance training, strength training
is the optimal way to dispose of
glucose, right? I think it's a critical
way. I mean, what we know with strength
training is it builds muscle and so the
more muscle mass that you have generally
the better your metabolism.
This one change has transformed how my
team and I move, train, and think about
our bodies. When Dr. Daniel Lieberman
came on the diio, he explained how
modern shoes with their cushioning and
support are making our feet weaker and
less capable of doing what nature
intended them to do. We've lost the
natural strength and mobility in our
feet. And this is leading to issues like
back pain and knee pain. I'd already
purchased a pair of Viva barefoot shoes.
So I showed them to Daniel Lieberman and
he told me that they were exactly the
type of shoe that would help me restore
natural foot movement and rebuild my
strength. But I think it was
planttoicitis that I had where suddenly
my feet started hurting all the time.
And after that I decided to start
strengthening my own foot by using the
Vivo Barefoots. And research from
Liverpool University has backed this up.
They've shown that wearing Vivo Barefoot
shoes for 6 months can increase foot
strength by up to 60%.
Visit
vivobarefoot.com/doac and use code
dac20 for 20% off. That's a
vivobarefoot.com/dac. Use code
DOAC20. A strong body starts with strong
feet. What role is fiber playing in all
of this? Because a lot of people are
talking about fiber at the moment and
saying that we're fiber deficient. Oh,
we are for sure. I mean, the average
American gets somewhere around 14 grams
of fiber a day. And we're meant to have
about 30 to 35 40 grams a day. Our
paleolithic ancestors got even more than
that, 50 to 100 grams a day. So, we are
not getting enough fiber. It's critical
for blood sugar stabilization. So, is
protein intake. But getting fiber from
real
food, you know, eating sufficient
vegetables. We know from the microbiome
studies that you want about 25 to 35
different species of fruits and
vegetables in a week to be able to feed
your microbiome.
And what role is the microbiome playing
in my hormone function? It's playing a
huge role. So your microbiome is one of
the control functions for estrogen
levels and maybe testosterone
levels. So there's a birectional
relationship, Steve,
where there are three bacteria in the
gut that can um take estrogen and make
it keep recirculating.
So, you're meant to produce estrogen and
then use it and then either poop or pee
it out. But what happens with some
people if they've got these bacteria is
they keep recirculating the estrogen
like bad karma. And so those people tend
to have higher estrogen levels. It tends
to be associated in men with this
greater risk of um metabolic
dysfunction, prostate cancer and in
women it's associated with more breast
cancer and endometrial cancer.
And that a lot of that starts and is
caused by the gut microbiome. Yes. And
the microbiome, their favorite food is
fiber. So the way that you keep your
microbiome, your microbes happy and
healthy is to feed them a fair amount of
fiber. What What kind of foods have high
fiber? Is it like broccoli and stuff?
Yes. So broccoli, Brussels sprouts,
cauliflower,
cabbage, kabi.
What do you
eat and like how do you live? So I'm a
sensualist. So I love food. I love the
taste of food. I love the smell of food.
I love the look of food. I had a history
of disordered eating. I had anorexia as
a teenager and bulimia through my 20s
and
30s. But now I have a more neutral
relationship with food. I have worn a
continuous glucose monitor almost
continuously for the past seven years.
And so I know a lot about the foods that
serve me the best. So, usually for
breakfast, I love eggs. And
so, I eat fresh eggs, usually scrambled
or um lightly
boiled. I like to have that with greens
or some other leftover vegetable from
the night
before. I eat a lot of vegetables. I aim
for somewhere around a half pound to a
pound a day. So that's divided between
um salads, the vegetables I have at
dinner, um a smoothie. I put vegetables
in smoothies along with a protein
powder. I eat a lot of cruciferous
vegetables. I have sluggish detox
pathways. I know that genomically and I
know it from my biomarker testing. What
does that mean? Means
that maybe it's related to my
sensitivity. I've got my I don't make
sufficient glutathione, which is um one
of the ways that you detoxify. It's an
antioxidant in your body. And
so
I like to to close that gap by making
sure that I'm getting
sufficient cruciferous vegetables. I eat
a lot of broccoli sprouts. What do you
think of the keto diet? I'm a fan of the
ketogenic diet because in your book
there's this chapter called the keto
paradox. Yes.
What are your thoughts on keto? Well,
what I find with keto is that men tend
to do better on it than women. And what
I found with women is that maybe related
to hormones and their sensitivity, they
have more thyroid dysfunction. They have
more menstrual irregularity. Somewhere
around 45% of women that are on a
classic ketogenic diet. So women tend to
have more issues with the ketogenic diet
takes them longer to get into ketosis
than it does a man. Even if you the
average man if they fast for somewhere
around 14 to 16 hours they start to
produce ketones and for women it takes
longer takes more like 18 to 20 hours.
So probably that's related to fertility
and evolutionarily there's some pressure
for us to not go into a ketogenic state,
but it makes it harder for women to get
into ketosis and stay in ketosis. Is
there a danger to women doing ketosis?
Because you said me um their periods are
going to become irregular. Not
necessarily. I think depending on how
you do it, you know, a lot of the data
that we have on the ketogenic diet is in
populations that don't apply to you or
me because the bulk of the data that we
have is in people with seizure
disorders. So, they're different. It's a
different population and they're also on
a form of the ketogenic diet that is
very strict. You know, no more than 10
to 20 grams of carbohydrates day. So, I
think you can play with your
carbohydrates and find out what your
carb threshold is so that you can remain
in ketosis, get the benefits of all the
phytonutrients that you can get from
vegetables and play both sides so that
you get the health benefits, you get the
metabolic function improvement, you get
the uh lowering of insulin without some
of the side effects. What are the side
effects? The main ones that I see are
the thyroid dysfunction. Yeah.
Uh sometimes there's a a rise in
cortisol in people who are really
limiting their carbohydrates. And then
it can also affect serotonin so that
people don't sleep as well on a
ketogenic diet. Now, some people love
that. They go on a ketogenic diet and
they're like, "Oh, I only need to sleep
six or seven hours a night." But over
time, if you need more and it's the
serotonin that is at the root of why
you're not sleeping as well, that can
cause a problem. Is there anything else
that the keto ketogenic diet might be
doing to my hormones, like my
testosterone or my other hormones that
is worth noting? Because I'm super, you
know, I'm wondering whether to stay on
the ketogenic diet for a long period of
time. I typically do it for a couple of
weeks a year, but I'm I'm wondering if
this is something that I could do for
like a year or maybe longer. So, I think
if you stay on it for more than a few
weeks, you want to check your biomarkers
and you just want to make sure that it
agrees with the intelligence of your
body. So, do some molecular profiling
and see if it's a good fit. Have you
seen people that stay on it for years
and have biomarkers? Yes. Okay.
And I think what's important to
understand is that exercise performance
some sometimes can be adversely affected
by the ketogenic diet. And that might be
an interesting experiment for you to do
like with your running and your 5K time.
What a lot of athletes do is if they
want to experiment with a ketogenic
diet, say they're a cyclist and they're
trying to get their weight down so that
their um power is up, what what they
tend to do before a race is they add
carbs back two weeks before the race so
that they're they're filling their
glycogen stores. And so that that's
another piece that you may want to be
tracking is your exercise performance.
If I'm trying to lose weight, is there
an optimal approach to take? Because the
ketogenic diet has been the fastest way
I've I've ever discovered of losing
weight quickly. But if you're a man or
woman trying to lose weight,
specifically like that annoying weight,
the belly fats, those kinds of things.
If someone comes to you and says that,
what what do you say to them?
What I like about the ketogenic diet for
weight loss, and I'm really careful
about weight loss because it's
problematic. It's problematic. And I
think body shaming is a big problem. And
so I'm really careful about this. But
when it comes to a ketogenic diet, what
I like about it is that ketones are
really satisfying. So they increase your
satiety and I think it's much more
effective than trying to limit your
calories and be in a calorie deficit.
So, with a ketogenic diet, usually you
do a calorie deficit, but you're
producing ketones, which are making you
feel more satisfied, so you're not
standing in front of the refrigerator
wondering when the next time is that you
can eat.
Mhm. And what about
fasting? You know, there's been a lot of
talk about autophagy and doing these
kind of long fasts to heal the body.
What's your perspective on that? I think
there's a time and a place for fasting.
I think these ways of activating some of
the benevolent um pathways in the body
can be very good for you. So it can be
good for mitochondria. It can be good
for uh your hormone balance. It can help
you with insulin as an example. So you
asked about someone who was wanting to
lose weight and also wanting to address
belly fat. I would say that's a
situation where you really want to pay
attention to insulin. So fasting can get
you that. So can a ketogenic diet. Often
we combine the two because you can
induce
ketosis faster by doing intermittent
fasting together with a ketogenic diet.
Is the ketogenic diet like a form of
fasting?
You could think of it that way. I mean I
would I would say it allows you to fast
and it makes the behavior change easier.
[Music]
Um, you know, the thing about fasting is
there are some people who are really
good at it and it doesn't raise their
cortisol. It doesn't induce a stress
response. And then there are other
people who get very stressed with a
ketogenic diet or with fasting. And so
part of it is is trying to get a sense
of your own
response to the food that you're eating
to see, okay, what suits me the best?
How do I feel the best? Where is my
cognitive function at an optimal level?
What helps me with brain fog? What helps
me with allergies or whatever whatever
symptoms you're tracking? You know, one
of the things we know with ketones,
which are produced, you know, your body,
as you well know, is this. It's like a
hybrid car that can flip between burning
gas, which is like glucose in this
analogy, or electric, which in this
analogy is ketones. The thing about
ketones is they're they not they're not
just a satiety molecule that makes you
feel satisfied. They also have
anti-inflammatory aspects inside of the
body. So, they're an important signaling
pathway. There's a reason why your body
produces ketones. Now, do you want to do
that for a
year? We'd have to see. We'd have to
look at your biomarkers. You know, the
the normal way that your genome
developed was to flip in and out of
ketosis based on the food supply. And
now that food is abundant, most people
are not going into ketosis. Been able
but being able to switch back and forth
can be very healthy for you. when people
come to you and they're asking questions
about hormones these days, you must have
seen in your career a shift in interest
um on the subject of hormones, but but
also a certain a certain area of
hormonal health that people have a
greater obsession
with. Of all the sub the subjects we've
talked about today relating to hormones,
what is it that people are most
interested in right now?
I would say for women it's permenopause.
And for anyone that doesn't know what
permenopause is, when does that begin
and what is it? Typically begins between
35 and 45 for women. And it's the age at
which your
ovaries start to run out of ripe eggs.
And the mitochondria in your eggs are
not working the way that they once did.
And so your ovaries are aging and that
leads to changes in your hormone levels.
So a lot of people think of pmenopause
is mostly being a hormonal situation. A
change in estrogen, progesterone, maybe
testosterone. And what I think it's
important to realize is it's much
broader than that. It's your metabolic
system. It's the way that your brain is
responding to glucose. It's your immune
system. It's a time when more women have
the experience of autoimmunity and
autoimmune
disease. So per menopause is this
incredibly dynamic time. There's more
than 100 plus symptoms that women
experience and it makes me crazy. I was
just talking to my agent and my
publisher a couple weeks ago. They're
both women in their early 40s and they
were having symptoms, you know, some of
those hundred symptoms that are uh
characteristic of pmenopause. They went
to their doctor and said, "I've got
these mood swings. I'm having trouble
sleeping. Having some night sweats. Is
this
pmenopause?" And the doctor said, "No,
you're too young." So, there's a
knowledge gap. There's a research gap
and a knowledge gap and a huge treatment
gap for women who are in
pmenopause. Most women are not getting
the treatment that they
need. So, what are they asking about?
out there asking
about why do I feel so disregulated? Why
is it that I can't manage stress the way
I once did? Why would I rather mop the
floor than have sex with my husband? Why
is sex painful all of a sudden? Why do I
have this belly fat that appeared out of
nowhere and my usual techniques for how
to deal with that aren't working? Those
are some of the questions that they ask
which map to your hormones. And what is
the youngest you've ever seen someone
enter permenopause?
Well, I see women who have premature
ovarian
insufficiency, which is when you go
through menopause before age
40. So, I've seen a fair amount of that.
You know,
probably 50 patients over the course of
my career. It's relatively rare. And
then I see women who have early
menopause, which is when they stop
having their periods or they have an FSH
level of 25 to 30. And FA, what's FSH?
Follical stimulating hormone. It's one
of the control hormones for your
estrogen and progesterone in the body.
So if that occurs, they have their final
menstrual period between 40 and 45.
That's considered early menopause.
So there's this really dynamic time
where your hormones are wildly
fluctuating, especially estrogen.
Progesterone is declining and women have
this increase in the symptoms that they
experience and no one is really tracking
it carefully. That's what needs to
change.
tracking it through their blood samples,
blood samples
and connecting their symptoms to what is
happening in their ovaries, in their
immune system, in their metabolic system
and putting it together for them and
offering them options. You believe that
many of the symptoms of menopause are
avoidable? Yes. Yes. And by that I mean
using hormone therapy and using
lifestyle medicine as early as possible
to manage that transition. Because when
a woman goes to a doctor now, that
doctor might say, "Well, you're you're
getting older. This is what happens." Or
they might just completely miss it.
That's
right. Or they might get started on a
birth control pill. That's used a lot
for women who are in menopause. And I
don't think that's the right solution.
What do you think of birth control
pills?
I think if they help you avoid
surgery, they can be beneficial, but I
think they're way overused in our
culture. And most people who agree to a
birth control pill don't receive full
informed consent. They're not told that
it'll raise the inflammation in your
body by two to threefold. It increases
your risk of autoimmune disease,
especially Crohn's disease.
It makes your control system for your
hormones less
flexible. It can rob you of
testosterone. It can lower your free
testosterone. It can shrink your
clitoris by up to 20%. I feel like if
that was part of the informed consent,
very few people would sign up for it.
But who is the birth control pill for
then? You know, I used to think that it
was a feminist invention, that it was a
way
of putting your fertility in your hands.
And I went on the birth control pill
when I was 16. But I feel like there are
some costs to it that um a lot of
teenagers and women in their 20s and 30s
aren't aware of. And for me, I feel like
that awareness is really critical. So,
who's it for? I would say it's a simple
entree into
contraception, but I would much rather
people use things like an IUD or condoms
or some other barrier method that
doesn't mess with their hormonal
intelligence.
How are you doing?
Oh, quite good. Quite good. I love that
question. I went through a divorce two
years ago. And I feel like, you know, I
my I have two daughters. They both went
off to college and were out of the
house. And I realized
that my time with my now
ex-husband had run its course and we
came together to create this beautiful
family, but we were no longer a good fit
for each other. So, a big part of my
spiritual work has been coming to terms
with that and
um and really getting clear about okay
for the second half of my life, what is
it that I
want? What is my mission? How do I
support that? How do I only give a whole
body
yes to um the things that I say yes to?
How do I whole body? Yes. What does that
mean? Whole body. Yes. So, this is
something I learned
from one of my mentors, Diana
Chapman. Um, she learned it from, I
believe, Katie
Hendricks, who's a therapist. The idea
is that instead of saying yes to things
that you're
offered purely from a cognitive place,
that sounds like a good idea. Sounds
like a good opportunity. Let me do it.
Instead, you check up check in with your
whole body. You check in with your
heart. You check in with your your gut.
Does this really make a difference in
the world? Is this something that's
going to make
me jump out of bed in the morning? Is
this something that is worth the time
and the
effort? I'm a little older than you and
so I hold these opportunities a little
bit differently than I did in the past.
How long were you married for? How long
were you in a relationship with your
partner? We were together for about 22
years and married for 20.
How does one know that it's not right
anymore after 20 odd years?
Well, I would love to riff on this with
you. Okay. So I can tell you
that part of the challenge in my
marriage was that
um we had difficulty talking about
difficult topics. So highly charged
topics were tough for us to be able to
navigate. When we had a conflict or a
fight, we didn't repair very well. There
was a partial repair where you would
feel good enough to keep functioning and
take care of the kids and do your
householder stuff, but you didn't really
feel seen or like you cleaned up the
pain that was
there. There was a way
that I didn't feel fully understood or
seen. And not that I require that from
my partner, but I I felt
like there was a
misatunement. And I'm in a relationship
now where I have those things that I'm
talking about. And it's someone that I
have known for 30 plus years. We were
interns together at UCSF.
And I realize now
that, you know, I came together with my
ex-husband and I really am so blessed by
the life that we had and um the family
that we had,
but we also had a trauma bond. There was
a way that his trauma kind of
intersected with my trauma and we hung
in there for a very long
time, probably longer than we should
have.
So, how do you
know? I don't know, Stephen. I just can
tell you
that there was a way
that our
interactions was creating
disregulation in my body. And I'm not
blaming him. I, you know, it's a two
there's two sides of the street. But
there was a way that we just we didn't
quite gel together.
And is that not something that can be
prepared through communication and
therapy or sitting down and I mean you
would hope so, but we spent about 10
years out of the 20 years of marriage in
couples
therapy and it didn't really resolve
some of these conflicts.
We got better at eye statements. We got
better at saying what we were feeling
and not blaming. We got better at
um going for a walk when we were talking
about something
difficult. But there was still a way
that I felt alone and lonely inside of
the
relationship. And I decided I think a
fair number of women decide this. I
decided I was better off alone than to
continue in the marriage. When people
hear that that weren't in your
situation, they might think, okay, so
maybe he was preoccupied with something
else or he was he worked away. When you
say the word lonely, these are the kind
of things we think. We think of
proximity. But you're saying it I'm
guessing it wasn't proximity.
It wasn't proximity. I think it
was there was a way that we had a hard
time expressing love and feeling and
receiving
love. There was an
obstacle and some of it was trauma. And
the good news is there's a lot you can
do to resolve trauma.
But there was a way that
I I got to the point where I couldn't
try any longer. I tried for a lot of
years and I just couldn't keep trying.
When you look back, is there something
that could have been done further
upstream to prevent you getting to this
place in your view? Yeah, it's such a
it's a great question. You know, one of
the things that I've seen that has
helped to resolve trauma better than
anything
else
is psychedelic assisted
therapy. It's a way of looking at your
story, a way of looking at the facts of
your life with
um more
objectivity and it's a way of resolving
the way that trauma becomes embedded in
your system.
And so I started doing psychedelic
assisted therapy about five years ago
with the hope that it would help me with
my
marriage. And what I had hoped over time
is that I would do my part to resolve
the trauma signature in my own body and
that maybe we would do psychedelic
medicine together as a way of
reconnecting to the love that we felt
for each other and you know kind of get
the noise, turn down the volume on the
noise and we weren't able to do that. He
wasn't willing to he wasn't willing. he
wasn't open to psychedelics
and not everyone is. I'm not blaming him
for that. Um, and I think there's other
ways to create healing states of
consciousness. You know, breath work can
do it. Um, a near-death experience, peak
experiences can do it, flow states,
there's lots of different ways to create
these healing states of consciousness,
but we weren't able to get into that
healing state together.
Just for a second, I want to talk about
a company I've invested in and who
sponsored this podcast called Zoey. Like
me, many of you are big on tracking your
fitness and your sleep. But how many of
you understand how your body handles
food? Metabolic fitness is all about
understanding your metabolism's response
to food. And we all react differently.
So Zoe created a test to help you
understand how your body responds. And
it starts with their famous test
cookies, which are identical test meals
with the same sugar, fat, and calorie
content of the average meal. and
therefore acts as a metabolic challenge.
You also wear a continuous glucose
monitor that tests your blood sugar
levels. I've done this test and it left
me wondering how my metabolic fitness
compared to others like me. And my
results revealed everything. So, if
you'd like to learn about your body's
response to food, head over to zoey.com
to order your test kit now. And if you
want a discount, use code steen 10 at
checkout for 10% off your membership. As
a Zoe member, you'll get an athome test
kit and personalized nutrition program
to help you make smarter food choices
that support your health. That's
zoie.com with code Steven 10. One of the
things I've been told by one of the
menopause experts that you mentioned
earlier, Lisa, was that when women get
to menopausal a menopausal age, when
they're in menopause, they often have
greater clarity in what they want in
their life. That's what she said to me.
and she said that she we see divorce
rates increase during this period of
life. Is that true? It is true. It is
true. Yeah. The way it was explained to
me by one of my mentors was that when
you're in your reproductive years, so
premenopause, you've got a different
level of estrogen, progesterone, and
testosterone every day. And it makes you
accommodate, makes you kind of roll with
the punches.
And it sets up this level of
flexibility that starts to disappear
when you go through pmenopause and
menopause. And so the way my mentor
described it was that the hormonal veil
is lifted and you start to speak your
truth and not
accommodate. You speak your truth maybe
for the first time about the state of
your marriage, about the things that
you're happy about, the things that
you're not happy about, and it does lead
to an increased rate of divorce.
What about your happiness levels? Does
it increase your happiness levels? I
think it does. There's this really
interesting study that um is called the
UBend, and it looks at psychological
well-being for adults.
It's highest in your 20s and the very
start of your 30s and then there's this
U shape where your psychological
well-being goes down. I know you're 32,
so I'm a little sorry to break the news
to you. And then it goes back up right
around 50. So psychological well-being
goes up again. And when I first heard
about this Ubend, I remember reading an
article in The Economist about it. It
was so validating because it made me
feel like,
oh, things are really hard. Makes sense
to me that we see this through your 30s
and 40s and then it starts to have this
uptick again. And I think there are ways
to improve your psychological well-being
so that you're not stuck in the Ubend.
But happiness, yes, I would say
happiness, psychological
well-being is high again in your 50s.
I know that there's so many women that
listen to this show. Um, and I get so
many messages when we have conversations
about women's health, hormonal issues,
menopause, because women for a long
period of time haven't feel like haven't
felt like they've been heard and
understood. Um, they often feel like
they're being gaslit a little bit maybe
by their doctors or by some of the
information out there. So, this is quite
atypical of me, but you know women
better than I do, and you know what
women are concerned about in all seasons
of their life, what they're worried
about, what they're confused about. So,
I want to just open the floor to you and
ask you based on all of the work that
you've done. You know, you've done work
on um women's hormones, diets,
lifestyle, sex drives, reclaiming their
balance, sleep, healthy weight for both
men and women, but I'm asking
specifically for women here. So with all
of that in mind, what is the question
that I should be asking you?
How do we do a better
job supporting women?
How do we do a better job supporting
women? Yes. How do we do it
systemically? How do we do it in terms
of health care for women? But I would
say in particular for you with the
platform that you
have, the women's health gap that we're
facing right now, which has only gotten
worse over the 30 years of my career. I
think to ask, how do we help women
rise? How do we make systemic changes so
that we don't have this women's health
gap? Let's close the gap. How do we do
that together?
I have a question for you.
Can you guess what the question is? I
have an idea. Go on then.
So, the women's health gap, I believe,
is rooted in two things. Sex
differences, you know, having two X
chromosomes versus XY in men. hormonal
differences, these life cycle cycle
changes that women go through like
postpartum, pregnancy, pmenopause,
menopause.
But then there's also gender differences
which are socially
constructed. And that includes women
having more than their share of
emotional labor, women having more
stress than men, experiencing more
stress, women having more trauma, so
they have higher A scores than men. And
it's led to, if we just look at the
statistics, double the rate of
depression, double the rate of PTSD,
post-traumatic stress disorder, double
the rate of insomnia, four times the
rate of autoimmune disease, nine times
the rate of thyroid dysfunction. So
there's sex differences that map to
those outcomes, but then there's these
gender
differences in the way that women don't
feel supported, the way that they feel
conflicted in trying to create work life
balance, the way that they experience
more
stress. That's what we need to address.
We can't change the biology, but we can
change the gender differences. we can
change the socially constructed
differences that lead to it being a
health hazard to be female.
Okay. So, tell me about that then. What
is it about the socially constructed
narrative of what it is to be a man and
a woman that
is causing unfavorable outcomes for
women? There's a lot of things. So I
would
say what we know if you look
at the nervous system, we know that
women tend to have more um imbalance
between the sympathetic nervous system
and the parasympathetic nervous system.
What's that? So the sympathetic nervous
system is fight, flight, freeze.
The parasympathetic nervous system is
rest and digest, feed and breathe. So
stay and play is relax, chill, play.
Relax, chill. That's where the healing
happens. And we're not meant to hang out
in one or the other. We're meant to have
this fluid balance between the two.
Ideally, like a 50/50 split. And so
women tend
to in dealing with our culture have more
sympathetic
activation. And so finding ways to
address that more stress, more stress.
So at least in the US, we do these
annual stress reports and we find that
on average women have about 10% more
stress than men.
Why is that just because they're more
likely to report it or is there a
biological or evolutionary reason why
they're more stressed? I don't think
it's biological. I think it's related
to power imbalances. I think it's
related to
patriarchy. I think it's related to
power
over. So for instance with these A
scores, the trauma scores, the trauma
scores, we know that women experience
more trauma than men, about 10% more,
similar to stress. And they also
experience trauma at an earlier age
compared to men. They have much more
sexual violence. They're 14 times more
likely to be raped than a man. So there
are ways that our culture has allowed
women to be
violated and that has to end. How do we
do that? I don't know. This is where we
need to riff and figure out how do the
systems change so that there's a more
equal distribution of power.
Are women more
sensitive? So if you put a man and a
woman or a boy and a girl in the same
stressful environment, would they have
different
biological markers like biomarkers?
Would you see higher levels of cortisol
in the woman or higher cortisol levels
in the man? I don't know the answer to
that. My sense is from the work of
Elaine Erin, who's done the work on this
profile of high sensitivity, that it's
about equal in men and women, but I
don't know that for sure. I'd have to
fact check that. Do you see higher rates
of autoimmune diseases in women or men?
Women.
Forex. Forex. Yes. 400% more autoimmune
diseases and women. Yes. And what are
these autoimmune diseases? What's an
example of one? So, there's about 100
autoimmune diseases. It includes things
like rheumatoid arthritis, multiple
sclerosis, type 1 diabetes, Hashimoto's
thyroiditis, which is the leading cause
of low thyroid function,
uh
psoriasis, there's a long list. And why
are women getting these autoimmune
diseases 400% more than men? We don't
know. So the speculation is that it's
related to both biological differences,
sex differences as well as gender
differences. So the biological
differences include the difference in
the levels of hormones, the X
chromosome. Women have more for instance
vaccine response compared to men. our
immune system is more
um reactive in some ways than the immune
system of men. But then there's also
these gender differences, these socially
constructed differences like women who
have a hard time saying no. Women who
give until they drop, who
overfunction, who are trained when they
go through their childhood
to take care of others at the expense of
their own self-care.
And so how these interact and lead to a
four-fold increased risk in women, we
don't entirely know, but definitely we
see four times the rate in women. What's
your view? There's a big debate that's
always raging on about gender roles in
society and there's obviously been a big
shift over the last couple of decades in
I think actually in part caused by the
introduction of the contraceptive pill
which has meant that women are working
more I think in the western world and
these numbers might be wrong there's
less babies being born men and women are
having less sex with each other men are
killing themselves more often
women are having coming into puberty
earlier I believe or is it later it's
earlier
and then having ch less children and
significantly later. Funnily, I saw a
graph yesterday which showed the rise in
breast cancer amongst women. And
actually, I think it was actually no, it
was the rise in all cancers amongst
women versus men. And the men graph was
pretty flat, but there was this
significant rise in women getting more
and more forms of cancer. And I was
looking through some of the research as
to why that would happen. And one of
them, one of the points of research said
that because women are having children
later that this is in causing a rise in
cancer.
Does that make sense? Well, that has
been studied with for instance breast
cancer. Okay. So, we know you know
there's a lot of different factors that
can increase a woman's risk of breast
cancer. One of them is the age at which
you have your first baby. And so the way
that we think of this is that it's
related to estrogen exposure. So women
who get pregnant and maybe they
breastfeed for a year, that's often a
period of time like a year and 9 months
where they're not exposed to as much
estrogen than they would be if they were
menstruating during that time. And so
having babies later seems to be
associated with a greater risk of breast
cancer. The ideal age I was taught when
I went through my training for having a
baby is
24. And I don't have a single friend
who's had a baby in their 20s. Is there
something we're getting wrong with
gender roles when you think about our
biology and our hormones? I really love
the the questions. I mean, they're
thought experiments. So, yes, I do think
there's something we're getting wrong.
You had a guest recently who was talking
about sex span. Oh, yeah. in the period
of time that you're sexually active and
satisfied with sex. And I I do feel like
we've got an epidemic of sexless
marriage. People who are not having as
much sex, who don't realize how
important pleasure is, especially for
the nervous system and for regulation.
Orgasm is one of the most effective
strategies for creating nervous system
regulation, for dropping into your
parasympathetic nervous system, for
dropping into your parasympathetic. And
what we know is that
um you know with with gender roles and
with what's happened with
work, we've lost some of the polarity
between
um men and women. I mean, I imagine you
also have listeners who are gay men or
uh lesbian couples. So, I want to be
mindful of being inclusive here. But I
think we've lost a lot of polarity.
And polarity exists in all kinds of
relationships as well, doesn't it? To
some degree, it does, but sometimes you
have to work at it. Sometimes you have
to create the polarity. When you say
polarity, if we're talking about
heterosexual relationships, what is the
polarity that you think we've lost? I
would say right now in my 50s, I'm
having the best sex of my life, the best
orgasms of my life, and there's a lot of
polarity in my relationship. And I've
learned that
um this is pretty controversial and
edgy, so I'm I'm just gonna say it
anyway. I feel like for women who
are professionals who work really hard,
there are some ways that polarity can be
really helpful in the
bedroom. And here I'm talking about um
gender roles and you know understanding
sort of what what is satisfying for you
sexually and asking for it in your
relationship. A lot of the professional
women that I
know, they enjoy vanilla sex, but they
also
like a weave of domination.
to be dominated or to dominate both. I
mean, it's a personal preference, but I
think there's a way that it's a way of
playing with power that I think can
be sexually very
satisfying. What do you think? Do you
think it's important in sexual
relationships to have polarity to have
um to have like the feminine and
masculine
attributes or do you think you both just
come to a sexual connection equals and
that's how it should always be? I think
probably the answer is that everybody
has their own favorite flavor of ice
cream. And I can only speak to my
favorite flavor of ice cream, which is I
like I don't like vanilla Mhm. ice
cream. It's not my favorite flavor. And
I think I do like to be more dominant.
That turns me on. Mhm. And I like to
vary it cuz I'll get bored. Especially
if you're in a long relationship, you
got to [__] find some way to spice it
up. So, yes, you do. I'm buying all
kinds of stuff off the internet to try
and, you know, keep it novel and new.
Okay. Now, things are getting
interesting. Oh, really? Yes. Well, I
honestly I've landed here in LA and
before I even landed, I ordered loads of
stuff just to be at the house when I got
here. Fantastic.
It's probably because my team are
listening, but I [__] No, but I do
because I'm like I have I have to I like
try and plan sex to be interesting. Yes.
Which is it's like a part-time job. It
is. What's the alternative? The
alternative is it just fizzles out and
gets boring and then it's the same. And
um but also I think I play with distance
because of the way my schedule is. So I
don't see my partner for a couple of
weeks and then we see each other and
then we go away again. And so it kind of
keeps it a little bit more novel and
stuff and interesting. I try and make
sure that I stay attractive. Part of I
told her I said part of the reason I go
to the gym every day is because we
signed a contract. Mhm. Not a real
contract, but we signed a contract when
we met each other that we'd stay
attractive and that's intellectually
attractive, that's physically
attractive, it's whatever. So, so yeah,
I think a lot about it. That's
fantastic. It's a good strategy. And I
appreciate how you are being very
intentional about your sex life. Is this
in part why you knew the old
relationship wasn't working? Yes.
Just fizzled. It fizzled. And I'm a very
sexual
person. Eroticism really matters to me.
And to not have that be front and
center felt like a death.
And you tried to revive, keep alive.
Yes.
People can relate. I know this because I
see much of the feedback I get on the
episodes where we talk about sex. People
often are
struggling with a dying, whimpering sex
life. Again, I ask
you, is there anything that can be done?
Is it
prevention? Is that is that the key
here? Or is it about making sure you're
in a relationship with someone who's
sexually open-minded?
And I also I guess the third question
here would be was it ever good?
So let me feel a way into answering your
questions. I feel like
there's there's some sex differences
too. Um biological differences
between
what the male sexual response and the
female sexual response and that needs to
be understood. I feel like when you have
sexual dysfunction in a relationship,
it's a couple's issue. It's never one
person or the other. It's it's a
couple's issue that you want to address
as a
couple. What we know is that men are a
little simpler. there tends to be desire
um you know uh this physiological change
that occurs in terms of blood flow and
an erection and and then there's a um
plateau phase and then orgasm
ejaculation we can talk about separating
ejaculation from orgasm in a minute but
in women it's more complicated so that
was the masters and Johnson way of
thinking about the the sexual response.
Master St. Johnson Masterson and Johnson
and now we know sorry Masterson Johnson
they were sexyologists that published
this particular model. Yeah. And it
wasn't until maybe 15 20 years ago that
Rosemary Basson at the University of
British Columbia found that women have a
different response. It's more circular
and it has to do
with feeling
um emotionally
connected in order to be
receptive to having sex with their
partner. Whereas men in some ways do the
opposite. And I'm curious if this is
true for you. They need to have sex in
order to feel emotionally connected.
Women actually need the emotional
connection first to be
receptive to sexuality. And so this
leads to a lot of disconnect and it
includes things like how many times in
the past week did you empty the
dishwasher? There are things that create
emotional connection that a lot of men
don't
realize. And then for women, they often
don't feel
um like they they the sexual
response will not happen unless they
feel emotionally
connected. And this was part of the
problem in my own marriage was that I
didn't feel that emotional connection. I
tried really
hard to establish that emotional
connection, but I didn't have it.
I have it now. Is it related to the
newness of my relationship?
Maybe. And knowing that, knowing about
the emotional
connection in some ways changes your
homework as a man. Do you know what
makes your girlfriend feel emotionally
connected?
Quality time. Deep questions. Yes.
Um, the conversation cards. Oh, yes.
Tell me about that. Well, we sell these
conversation cards on this show. You can
check in the uh description below if you
want to buy them. But basically, at the
end of the conversations on this
podcast, the guests write a question in
this diary in front of me for the next
guest. And then these all become Yeah,
thanks. These all become conversation
cards. Unlock deeper levels of
connection. Open up to open up. Level
three is the the more deep questions. So
Oh, I like it. Um this I'm probably a
level three person. You're a level three
person, I would imagine. You strike me
as a level three person. You really do.
But those kinds of things. So like deep
um deep questions and spending time and
then that's it. Can I see some of those
level threes? Yeah, here are all your
level threes. What is the most important
thing we haven't talked about that we
should have talked
about? Is there anything else?
Sleep is something we didn't talk about
when we think about the impact sleep has
on our hormonal
balance. Is it important? My gosh. Sleep
is as close to a panacea as we have.
When you say panacea, you mean like the
holy grail? It is the holy grail. It is
so critical for functioning. You know
what I see taking care of a lot of
executives is that they think that
they're the exception that they don't
need 78.5 hours of sleep every night.
But only about 2% of the population has
the short sleep gene. The rest of us
need
to optimize our sleep to the best of our
ability. So what we know is that it
affects your hormones inside of 24
hours. One bad night of sleep raises
your insulin, raises your cortisol the
next day, makes you more hungry, makes
you more likely to crave carbohydrates.
So, just like you can create a negative
cycle, you can create a positive cycle
by optimizing your sleep. I'm a big fan
of wearables
because especially if you wake up in the
morning and you don't feel flush with
sleep and fully restored and fully
recovered, you want to understand the
metrics. How much deep sleep did you
get? How much REM sleep? How many
interruptions did you have? Did you
snore? What was your heart rate
variability? was what was your
respiratory rate? So, I feel like sleep
is one of those lifestyle factors that
we need to optimize.
On my ketogenic diet, I noticed that my
heart rate variability seems to go
lower, which is scary. Do you see that a
lot when people do kind of these kind of
more restrictive diets and they're in
ketosis? There can be. I mean, I would
look at some of the other variables as
well. And one of the things I really
like is they eat sleep. Have you used
that at all? Yeah, I have. Um, the
mattress. Did it help you with HRV?
I believe it did. Um, I I don't have the
I had the results at the time, but I was
sleeping really really good on it. Um, I
still use my Whoop, which hashtag ad. I
still use my Whoop for um my HRV. Mhm.
What are the things that you aim at when
someone comes to you with low HIV? A lot
of people want to improve their HIV. We
kind of see it as this holy metric now.
Sure. Well, I start with alcohol. So, we
know alcohol makes your HV decline, not
just for one night, but somewhere around
seven to nine nights. That's why I quit
alcohol. Yes. My h it just killed my the
first time I put my whoop on and I saw
the impact it had on my HRV. I thought
I'm not doing that again. And that's
exactly the kind of behavior change that
I get excited about. So when you see the
metrics and you see the reflection of,
oh my gosh, my physiology is so much
better off of alcohol and there's better
choices than alcohol, you want to make
that swap and the behavior change
sticks. So I
like I like grounding. So I find when I
get in the ocean, when I get in streams
with bare feet, when I walk on the sand,
that improves my HRV. The country that
seems to improve my HRV the most is
Costa Rica. There's something about the
aliveness there. My HRV doubles to
triples really. Micro doing mushrooms
also raises my
HRV quite significantly.
We have a closing tradition on this
podcast, like I said, where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest, not knowing who they're leaving
it for. And the question left for you
is, what do you do every
day to make a better brain and better
world?
M what I do every
day when I'm home in Marin County is I
go outside when I wake up in the morning
and I look at the I live on the ocean
and I look at the horizon like I trace
my eyes along the
horizon and I just was looking at the
data on morning sun because I didn't
quite believe it like It supposedly it
helps you with your circadian rhythm. It
helps you with sleeping better. It helps
you with melatonin
production. It helps you with mood. It's
got all of these benefits. And some
people say you only need five or 10
minutes of morning sun. That's
sufficient. And so I started looking at
the data and you actually need more than
that. like you start to see a benefit
around 30 minutes, but you need um you
still keep improving some of these
outcomes with longer like up to two and
a half hours. So the thing I do every
day is I get morning
light and I trace the horizon and I look
at nature and I remind myself that
nature is the best way to
regulate. that helps my brain.
Sarah, thank you. Thank you so much for
doing the work that you do. You're an
incredibly intriguing person in many
respects and you're clearly helping so
many people in so many wonderfully
important ways. Um, I highly recommend
everybody go and check out the books
that I have in front of me. There's I
mean there's there's quite a few of
them. I think there's six in total. I've
got three here. The autoimmune cure,
healing the traumas and other triggers
that have turned your body against you
is the book that I'm going to um highly
recommend. I think this is the the new
one and I've interviewed Paul Conte who
writes the um recommendation for the the
book on back of this. I've also got
another book here called The Hormone
Cure which is all about reclaiming
balance, sleep and sex drive,
maintaining a healthy weight, feeling
focused, vital and energized naturally
and one of the books that I was
referencing as we were going which is
Women Food and Hormones a four-week plan
to achieve hormonal balance lose weight
and feel like yourself again. If people
want to know more from you, they want to
hear you. You have a new podcast right?
Yes. Where do we go to listen to your
podcast? My website is
sarahzalmd.com and the podcast is called
Treated with Dr. Sarah. That's Sarah Zal
spelled S Z A L. That's right. And the
podcast is called Treated with Dr.
Sarah. Thank you so much. Thank you so
much, Stephen.
We launched these conversation cards and
they sold out. And we launched them
again and they sold out again. We
launched them again and they sold out
again because people love playing these
with colleagues at work, with friends at
home, and also with family. And we've
also got a big audience that use them as
journal prompts. Every single time a
guest comes on the diary of a CEO, they
leave a question for the next guest in
the diary. And I've sat here with some
of the most incredible people in the
world. And they've left all of these
questions in the diary. And I've ranked
them from one to three in terms of the
depth. One being a starter question. And
level three, if you look on the back
here, this is a level three, becomes a
much deeper question that builds even
more connection. If you turn the cards
over and you scan that QR code, you can
see who answered the card and watch the
video of them answering it in real time.
So, if you would like to get your hands
on some of these conversation cards, go
to the diary.com or look at the link in
the description below. This has always
blown my mind a little bit. 53% of you
that listen to this show regularly
haven't yet subscribed to the show. So,
could I ask you for a favor? If you like
the show and you like what we do here
and you want to support us, the free
simple way that you can do just that is
by hitting the subscribe button. And my
commitment to you is if you do that,
then I'll do everything in my power, me
and my team, to make sure that this show
is better for you every single week.
We'll listen to your feedback. We'll
find the guests that you want me to
speak to and we'll continue to do what
we do. Thank you so much.
[Music]
Oh, hey.